.TH CJSH 1 "September 2025" "Version 2.3.0" "CJ's Shell Manual"

.SH NAME
cjsh \- CJ's Shell

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cjsh
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
[\fICOMMAND\fR]

.SH OPTIONS

.SS "Login and Execution:"
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-login
Start shell in login mode. This enables loading of login configuration files.

.TP
.B \-c, \-\-command \fICMD\fR
Execute the specified command and exit.

.TP
.B \-\-set\-as\-shell
Show instructions to set CJ's Shell as your default shell.

.SS "Feature Toggles:"
.TP
.B \-\-no\-plugins
Disable the plugin system.

.TP
.B \-\-no\-themes
Disable theme support.

.TP
.B \-\-no\-ai
Disable AI assistant features.

.TP
.B \-\-no\-colors
Disable color output.

.TP
.B \-\-no\-titleline
Disable title line display.

.TP
.B \-\-no\-source
Don't source the ~/.cjshrc file.

.SS "Updates and Information:"
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Display version information and exit.

.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Display help and exit.

.TP
.B \-\-update
Check for updates and install if available.

.TP
.B \-\-check\-update
Check for updates without installing.

.TP
.B \-\-no\-update
Do not check for updates on launch.

.TP
.B \-\-silent\-updates
Enable silent update checks.

.TP
.B \-d, \-\-debug
Enable debug mode with verbose output.

.SH FILES

.TP
.B ~/.profile
Standard system profile. Sourced in login mode if it exists.

.TP
.B ~/.cjprofile
CJ's Shell profile configuration. Sourced in login mode.

.TP
.B ~/.cjshrc
CJ's Shell runtime configuration. Sourced in interactive mode unless --no-source is specified.

.TP
.B ~/.config/cjsh/colors
Directory where color configurations are stored.

.TP
.B ~/.config/cjsh/plugins
Directory where plugins are stored.

.TP
.B ~/.config/cjsh/themes
Directory where themes are stored.

.TP
.B ~/.config/cjsh/ai
Directory where AI configurations are stored.

.SH FILE SOURCING ORDER
.PP
1. ~/.profile (if exists, login mode only)
.br
2. ~/.cjprofile (login mode only)
.br
3. ~/.cjshrc (interactive mode only, unless --no-source specified)

.SH ENVIRONMENT
CJ's Shell sets and uses numerous environment variables to maintain its state and functionality:

.TP
.B Standard Variables
USER, LOGNAME, HOME, PATH, HOSTNAME, PWD, SHELL, IFS, LANG, PAGER, and TMPDIR are automatically configured.

.TP
.B Shell-Specific Variables
STATUS - Contains the exit code of the last executed command
.br
SHELL - Set to the full path of the cjsh executable
.br
SHLVL - Incremented when launching nested shells
.br
0 - Contains the name of the shell or script being executed

.PP
The shell supports full environment variable expansion in commands using standard $VAR or ${VAR} syntax.
Custom environment variables can be set using the export command or in configuration files.
Environment variables can be inspected with the 'export' command without arguments.

.SH PLUGINS
CJ's Shell implements a comprehensive and dynamic plugin system:

.TP
.B Plugin Architecture
Plugins are dynamically loaded shared libraries (.so/.dll/.dylib) that conform to the plugin API.
Each plugin can register commands, subscribe to events, and expose configurable settings.
Plugins have access to a structured API for interacting with the shell environment.

.TP
.B Plugin Management
Plugins can be managed with the 'plugin' command, which supports the following subcommands:
.br
available - List all available plugins
.br
enabled - List currently enabled plugins
.br
enableall - Enable all available plugins
.br
disableall - Disable all enabled plugins
.br
enable [NAME] - Enable a specific plugin
.br
disable [NAME] - Disable a specific plugin
.br
info [NAME] - Show detailed information about a plugin
.br
commands [NAME] - List commands provided by a plugin
.br
settings [NAME] - View or modify plugin settings
.br
install [PATH] - Install a new plugin from the given path
.br
uninstall [NAME] - Remove an installed plugin

.TP
.B Built-in Plugins
Several built-in plugins provide enhanced functionality:
.br
custom_ls - Enhanced ls command with color highlighting and formatting
.br
git_tools - Extended Git integration and information
.br
AnyShell - Provides shell execution capabilities

.TP
.B Plugin Events
Plugins can subscribe to shell events including:
.br
main_process_start - When the shell starts processing a new command
.br
main_process_command_processed - After a command has been processed
.br
main_process_end - When command processing completes
.br
plugin_enabled - When a plugin is enabled

.PP
Plugins are stored in the ~/.config/cjsh/plugins directory and are automatically discovered at startup.
Plugin settings are persisted across sessions in JSON configuration files.

.SH JOB CONTROL
CJ's Shell provides sophisticated job control similar to other Unix shells:

.TP
.B Job Management
Jobs are tracked using a structured Job system that maintains information about process groups, status, and command text.
Each job has a unique job ID and can contain multiple processes in a pipeline.

.TP
.B Job Commands
bg [JOB_ID] - Resume a stopped job in the background
.br
fg [JOB_ID] - Bring a job to the foreground
.br
jobs - List all active jobs with their status

.TP
.B Process Groups
The shell creates process groups for job control and properly handles terminal control.
Foreground jobs have exclusive access to the terminal while background jobs do not.

.TP
.B Signal Handling
The shell implements handlers for key signals including:
.br
SIGINT (Ctrl-C) - Interrupts the current foreground process
.br
SIGTSTP (Ctrl-Z) - Suspends the current foreground process
.br
SIGCHLD - Processes child termination and updates job status
.br
SIGHUP - Handles terminal disconnect
.br
SIGTERM - Handles termination requests

.PP
Job control is automatically set up during shell initialization and properly resets terminal state on exit.
Background jobs can be initiated using & at the end of a command and can be referenced by job ID (e.g., %1).

.SH AI ASSISTANT
CJ's Shell includes a sophisticated built-in AI assistant powered by large language models:

.TP
.B Assistant Models
The AI assistant can use multiple models including gpt-3.5-turbo and other OpenAI-compatible models.
Models can be changed using 'ai model [MODEL]' command.

.TP
.B Assistant Types
chat - General purpose conversational assistant
.br
code-interpreter - Specialized for programming and code analysis
.br
file-search - Optimized for searching through file contents

.TP
.B AI Commands
ai - Enter AI chat mode for interactive assistance
.br
ai log - Save the recent chat exchange to a file
.br
ai apikey - View or set the OpenAI API key
.br
ai chat - Access AI chat commands (history, cache)
.br
ai get [KEY] - Retrieve specific response data
.br
ai dump - Display all response data and last prompt
.br
ai mode [TYPE] - Set or view the assistant mode
.br
ai file - Manage context files (add, remove, active, available)
.br
ai directory - Manage save directory for AI-generated files
.br
ai model [MODEL] - Set or view the AI model being used
.br
ai rejectchanges - Reject AI suggested code changes
.br
ai timeoutflag [SECS] - Set timeout duration for AI requests
.br
ai config - Show current config name
.br
ai config list - List available configs
.br
ai config switch <NAME> - Switch to another config
.br
ai config save <NAME> - Save current config with a new name
.br
ai voice [VOICE] - Show or set the voice for dictation
.br
ai voicedictation [enable|disable] - Enable or disable voice dictation
.br
ai voicedictationinstructions [INSTRUCTIONS] - Set voice dictation instructions

.TP
.B Context Management
The AI can analyze files in the current directory to provide context-aware assistance.
Files can be added to context using 'ai file add [PATH]'.
The AI can interpret code, analyze errors, and provide suggestions based on the shell environment.

.PP
The AI assistant uses a dedicated configuration for the prompt that appears when in AI chat mode.
The response time depends on the model used and the complexity of the query.
Markdown-formatted responses are automatically processed for better terminal display.
The AI assistant requires an OpenAI API key which can be set with 'ai apikey set YOUR_KEY'.

.SH THEMES
CJ's Shell features an extensive theming system for customizing the shell appearance:

.TP
.B Theme Structure
Themes are JSON files stored in ~/.cjsh/themes/ that define various prompt segments.
Each theme can customize PS1, git status display, AI prompt, and newline display.
Terminal title formats can also be customized through themes.

.TP
.B Prompt Segments
ps1_segments - The main command prompt
.br
git_segments - Git repository status information
.br
ai_segments - Special prompt when in AI assistant mode
.br
newline_segments - Optional multiline prompt formatting

.TP
.B Theme Variables
Themes can incorporate dynamic information using variables:
.br
{USERNAME} - Current user's name
.br
{HOSTNAME} - System hostname
.br
{PATH} - Current working directory (with ~ for home)
.br
{DIRECTORY} - Name of the current directory
.br
{TIME12}/{TIME24} - Current time in 12/24 hour format
.br
{DATE} - Current date (YYYY-MM-DD)
.br
{GIT_BRANCH} - Current Git branch
.br
{GIT_STATUS} - Git status (✓ for clean, * for dirty)
.br
{OS_INFO} - Operating system name and version
.br
{CPU_USAGE} - Current CPU usage percentage
.br
{MEM_USAGE} - Current memory usage percentage
.br
{BATTERY} - Battery percentage and charging status
.br
{STATUS} - Last command exit code
.br
And many more...

.TP
.B Terminal Width
Themes are terminal-width aware and can adapt to different terminal sizes.
Right-aligned elements can be specified in the theme configuration.

.PP
Themes can be managed with the 'theme' command:
.br
theme - Display current theme and list available themes
.br
theme [NAME] - Switch to the specified theme
.br
theme load [NAME] - Explicitly load a theme
.br
Default themes include 'default', 'dark', 'light', and 'minimal'.
Terminal colors are automatically detected and supported according to terminal capability.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Start CJ's Shell in login mode:
.PP
.B cjsh --login
.PP
Execute a command and exit:
.PP
.B cjsh -c "echo Hello, world!"
.PP
Start shell with plugins disabled:
.PP
.B cjsh --no-plugins
.PP
Start shell with AI disabled but themes enabled:
.PP
.B cjsh --no-ai
.PP
Check for updates without installing them:
.PP
.B cjsh --check-update
.PP
Run a command with debug output enabled:
.PP
.B cjsh -d -c "ls -la"
.PP
Start shell without sourcing the .cjshrc file:
.PP
.B cjsh --no-source
.PP
Use the AI assistant to analyze files:
.PP
.B cjsh -c "ai file add myfile.cpp"

.SH AUTHOR
Caden J Finley - Abilene Christian University

.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs to: https://github.com/CadenFinley/CJsShell/issues

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2025 Caden J Finley. All rights reserved.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bash (1),
.BR zsh (1),
.BR fish (1)
